I had done a paper on the gravitational
field of aach on this is a hypothetical
particle that would go faster than light
what's the latest on the fmy Paradox
there's plenty of time for a
civilization to rise up send out a
mission to multiple planets pitch tent
use local resources to build more
rockets and go to two planets
4816 astronomers love the capern
principle it says your location is not
likely to be special we let around an
ordinary star and an ordinary Galaxy and
an ordinary supercluster you should ask
yourself why am I not a space
[Music]
colonist this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson here your personal astrophysicist
and today we are featuring my exclusive
one-on-one conversation with my longtime
friend and colleague fellow
astrophysicist J Richard got
III very deep thinker on all manner of
subjects Under the Sun and Moon and
Stars Rich
got hi Neil I think I think that's about
the best compliment I ever got best
compliment that's just about the best uh
Rich Gott you're you're a close friend
you're probably my closest colleague
friend that I have oh we spent a lot of
time together together in conversations
and dining with family and we we
probably met earlier but we didn't
become close friends until Princeton
University I did my postdoc there many
moons ago and you spent almost your
whole life on the faculty at Princeton
University so let me just put some of
your professional background on the
table uh you born and raised in Kentucky
right in high school did you win some
science fairs and things I won place in
the west inh house science Talent serch
that's the big one that's the big one
and now it's called the that be called
the in regenon regeneron now it's
regeneron and I won first place in math
in the uh uh National Science Fair
International got a trip to Japan now to
come in second place in westing house
did you you get to meet the president
yes we met President Johnson that was
that far ago
Johnson which Johnson was
that and then I was
they asked me to be head judge of that
contest for 14 years later who's the
most famous person you judged uh that'd
be Natalie Portman Natalie Portman yes
and I remember her paper she was in the
science Talent search yes she was in the
top 300 okay but what she doesn't know
is she was also in the top 120 I saw her
paper I liked it okay that's why I
remembered it I especially liked it even
before she was famous I had no idea who
this was was right her paper was judged
entirely on its scientific Merit mhm I
had no idea who she was it was about an
enzyme to digest Waste Paper make
hydrogen fuel I really like the project
so okay and in the movie Thor she plays
a scientist play does she plays an
astrophysicist someone thought to tap
into
[Applause]
that okay so you go off to college and
you're in the same graduating class as
Al Gore yeah you like farest Gump every
place you turn there's some famous thing
that spawns off of the moment that
you've had in life at the time uh people
said well his father was a Senator you
know so people said man he's maybe
president one day you know uh but if you
if you watch someone come from the
bottom up it's a long way up and so um
he did extraordinarily well there's a
lot of people who you think might become
president that never get remembered
that's so that's a torturous way up
rather than getting the result at the
end and looking back that's right and uh
Tommy Lee Jones was also in your class
class so okay no they're saying that
you're in their class oh that'd be
nice that's good okay so after college
you went to graduate school Princeton at
Prince got your PhD there then I went to
Caltech ran away for a little bit and
then I went to uh Cambridge University
of Cambridge England and then I came
back I joined the faculty and you've
been there been there ever since been
there ever since and I'm delighted that
you were there while I and likewise that
you were there when you first appeared
at Princeton I said this is somebody I
got to get to
know so we were friends there and we co
taught a class we did yes and we wrote a
textbook we did with a third the three
teners someone called us that Michael
stra Michael Strauss right and here is
that book here is that book welcome to
the universe it's a highly readable
textbook of the course we taught right
so when you look at this you don't think
oh I need to take a class with it this
you just sit down and read this this is
like a readable for readers coffee table
book one of my chapters in here is why
Pluto is not a planet chapter
nine I didn't notice that did you know
that was true oh I get it
now I'm only just now realizing that now
I get it okay right but in there was it
one of your chapters you we're talking
about big numbers no it's one of my
chapters but you helped me with one of
the numbers right well I'm trying to
find what are some of the biggest
numbers we can possibly think of right
and you can so how many people on earth
okay how many stars in the galaxy how
many galaxies in the universe and then
you realize you can say well how many
atoms are in a star in the universe you
add that up and then you realize you run
out of things to count when there no
more particles left there's not so how
would you ever need a number bigger than
that and then you get big numbers by
asking about combinations of things how
many outcomes how many scenarios and the
number one on that list was how many
chess games you can play and you ran off
and gave me that number right how did
you what did you do and you you're a fan
of Chess from way back yes yeah so so um
okay so here's how I did that people
have calculated how many moves there are
in a chess game maximum number um
there's a rule that says that you can
only go 50 moves without moving a pawn
or capturing a capture or at that point
either player can declare a draw and
let's make sure that they do you don't
want to go beyond that okay so so that
would mean it's an end game and you're
just wandering around the board yeah
they don't let you wander around forever
when when either player is able to
declare a draw let's assume that they do
so that's the rules okay so the maximum
number of moves is
5,900 given that rule so you know you go
along and then 50 moves and then you
capture a piece and then you go on
another 50 moves you try to make it last
as long as possible see see the longest
trying to calculate the maximum number
the maximum number okay so you just you
just move around not capturing pieces
until you have to capture a piece that
makes the longest game and so then uh
you want to promote all your pawns to
Queens and to do that you have to have
four pawns capture a piece or something
so you get you get them lined up in rows
of two each the Knight Pawn captures
something it's in front of the Rook pawn
and the black does the same thing and
then you can slide them past each other
promote all the pawns all eight pawns go
go by each other yes that's the long so
my pawns take out four your pawns your
no we don't try to capture any of the
pawns you try to capture the pieces
first get some other piece some other
piece got it got it your Pawn gets to
capture his Knight okay and then you got
your two pawns lined up and they can
slide by the other pawns you want them
to all make Queens at the end so you you
you want to make the game last as long
as possible now if you want to know how
many uh moves are on the first move a
chess that's 20 you can move each of the
pawns one or two spaces you can move the
knights out so there's 20 different
moves for white there 20 replies for
black so the number of combinations on
move one is 400 20 squar 20 time 20 you
got to keep multiplying by the number of
combinations okay you want to find a
chest position that has the most
possible
combinations of moves and I worked on
this to find the a position that I
thought was had anyone else done this
before what people had done was they
said what's the most moves white could
make okay 218 some guy figured that out
but the other king the king was kind of
stalemated so they decided like one move
I resign you know so so so they had
really thought as deeply about this
problem as you have well as to my
knowledge no one calculated the maximum
number of
okay so I found a setup where there were
133 moves for white and 124 replies for
black okay and the multiplied together
that was over 16,000 combinations on
that and I figured that's pretty much
maximal each player had eight Queens on
the board not nine and I had a KN there
you don't want all your pieces there
they start blocking each other you know
and so if you put the Rooks and
everything on there it's you get less
you get less combinations so this may
not be the maximum combination was but
it's hard to imagine that this number is
not enough okay cuz it's better than
most of them combinations okay I'm
trying to get upper limit here so you'd
have to take this number 16,000 and
something the product of those two
numbers and you have to take that to the
5,900 power multiply that out
it's 10 to the
25,000 to the^ 25,000 so it's a one with
25,000 zeros after it possible games um
upper limit upper limit on the possible
games you can knock off about knowing
how many they are at the beginning and
how many they'd have to be when there
only a queen and two kings left you can
knock this down to like 23,7200
what's a few what's a th000 orders of
magnitude between people anyway between
friends a thousand orders of magnitude
25,000 10 to the 25,000 it's bigger than
a Google by far that's 10 to the hund
yes and and sometimes you see people say
there's the number of chess games 10 to
120 power no that's it's much bigger
than that and so may my upper limit all
right so your upper limit includes
completely ridiculous games yeah of
course
of course you can play ridiculous games
okay so you did the calculation properly
it's a proper upper limit safely below
that we put that in the book I put that
in the book put that right in the book
because there's a chapter one of the
opening chapters just to get people
warmed up you had the number of quantum
States the size and scale of the
universe just trying to warm people up
yeah right and there just nothing but
big numbers just band-aided about here
yeah so that was our attempt I taught
the first third of the course right um
Michael Strauss our colleague the middle
third and you were the final taking us
into cosmology right and the like so do
you follow chess tournaments today I I
took you to the was it the international
Chess Championship this was to see
Carlson defend his Magus Carlson and and
you got us a family pass so I got to be
a member of your family for one day and
this is at South Street seport in
Manhattan they had the world
championship there the most heart Waring
thing to me about that day was that how
the chess people loved you they wanted
to take selfies with you they were so
pleased that you as an
astrophysicist would took an interest in
their thing but I wasn't as good as any
of them there I mean I had an interest
cuz my son was interested we played on a
chessboard he beat me easy and and then
because of you but he was like 15 or
something at the time well won I thought
you were good
that's what somebody told me to swim
meat once swim but anyway Travis because
of you they you took you back stage
you'll tell say why and and you got to
give my number on the broadcast to the
world oh to tell the world how many
possible inter and I said what do I have
to say here because all these people are
they live this game and I just I'm an
interloper but yes I did tap that
content and Travis and I got to play a
few moves on the actual champ ship board
yes and I noticed that when I picked up
a piece they had a little electronic
thing in the base it was wired it was a
beautiful Walnut chest set but it was
wired so when they made the move it show
up on the big board for everybody
outside for everybody out it's an
acoustically insulated space there was
like oneway glass we were looking into
the yeah it it was it was wonderful and
I got to make Magnus Carlson's first
move that was special the next day you
got to make the move yes I guess they
give Celebrity Status to that I and
points to the just to be clear I didn't
choose what his move would be you could
have started him off
bad should bring the night out real
first no so I didn't know I would have
this privilege right and so he pointed
to the the pawn that I would then move
and then I did that and press was there
and the like and then then we exited
this hermetically sealed space but but I
I I invited you cuz I knew you had some
interest in background in chess yeah
well the big thing in chess now is the
AI you know because the computers can
play now much better right than than
humans can play they tell you the first
time I beat a computer I was in college
and I was playing and the the computer
was good but I I feel bad how I beat it
should I have emotions about this or not
you pulled a fast one I noticed yeah
that if I didn't move a chess piece that
was highly expected of me and I instead
moved a different piece it stumped its
strategy because it kept thinking he's
going to move this other piece because
that's going to give him an advantage
and it organized its strategies around
that expectation so when I started
moving other pieces it got flumix and I
found it would make mistakes at that
point oh and I just went in for the kill
and I was able to beat it three out of
four times when before I realized this I
was 0 for six or something but I feel
bad that's not right well well similar
things happened in the chess today I
mean first of all you have to understand
that it knows the rules of Chess so it
just wants to win it's happy to win by a
little get to a pawn end game it can win
it's happy they trained it on go they
had a program called alphao they played
it against Lee sadal who was a terrific
Champion that they had and he won only
one game out of five but that was an
amazing game because he had this amazing
move where it joined two areas and the
computer didn't see this move coming so
that's the best move ever played in the
sport ever against the computer this is
go this is the territorial game with
black and white stones I mean that's
what they are right they they flip yes
you try to conquer territory right and
Surround consider way more challenging
than chess is it not they say yeah yes
okay um but anyway the thing was you
might consider a really stupendous
program for go would just conquer you
know like three quarters of the field
you know that kind of thing but no wants
to win by just one stone just one extra
Square it wants to win the easiest way
possible so the games it's not quite
what you think you want to and in chess
the computer doesn't have testosterone
it just wants to win win even by a
little bit that's better that's quicker
it doesn't want to just conquer and slay
you no it doesn't want to chase your
King around the board and it just wants
to win you know some of the games are a
little dull there' be a lot of fireworks
in these computer versus computer games
sacrifices and everything then have it
wins by one Bond you know so so the
players today they they are I would say
machine
assisted they train on the computer they
memorize the openings they memorize you
know Carlson can look at a chess Magnus
Carl Magnus he say oh that was you know
so and so versus so and so 1934 you know
I mean he can memorize all those
openings and and then they play with all
those openings but now they know the
other players are doing that too so what
you have to do is make a suboptimal move
at some point drives that your opponent
off onto the territory they don't know
and you've practiced that variant so you
it's weird because you'd think the best
strategy is just to make the best move
all the time but they have to get the
human opponent off track they're doing
what I did to the to my computer
opponent they've learned what you
learned yourself long ago you figured it
out first yes CU that my moves were not
optimal they were just distracting to
its strategy and they're doing that
today what's the latest on the fery
Paradox the fery Paradox is there some
is there emerging thinking on this well
uh just let me set the stage here Rico
fery famously declared where are they
given the size of the Galaxy and the
fact that the galaxy has been around a
long time that there's plenty of time
for a civilization to rise up send out a
mission to multiple planets pitch tent
use local resources to build more
Rockets and go to two planets 4 8 16 you
can do this in hundreds of millions of
years easily right without even warp
drives or anything right one tenth the
velocity of life one tenth the speed of
Life very modest for any modern
civilization yes and still not us we're
not in that category yet and if that's
the case the Galaxy could and should be
teaming with alien civilizations so
where are they what's the latest that's
what he said where are they yes okay I
wrote a paper on this in
1993 it was called implications of the
capern principle for our future
prospects okay and astronomers love the
capern principle it says your location
is not likely to be special we live
around an ordinary star and an ordinary
Galaxy and an ordinary supercluster
we're used to this idea it's been used
by hyans to calculate the uh distance to
sirius arguing that why should the Sun
be the brightest thing in the universe
these other things are stars and they're
just like the sun and so what if they
knowing how dim it was he got the
distance to serus accur to factor of 20
which was extraordinary I didn't know he
did this calculation brilliant step to
make Christian hin yes Dutch polymath
right yes and I own one of his books a
Charming book a Celestial worlds
discovered
uh we just speculates on what life would
be like on all the planets so he looked
at the sky and said maybe if the Sun is
ordinary so are these other stars is
that right right so if the brightest
star in the night sky Sirius is just
like the sun how far away would it have
to be to be as dim as we see it right
given how bright the sun is in front of
us today to to even have that thought
have that thought is brilliant okay but
the most spectacular SU success of this
was when Hubble discovered that all the
galaxies were fleeing from us Edwin
Hubble the man not the telescope not the
T they named it after him
yes anyway they're all fleeing from us
and the further away the faster it's a
homogeneous expansion away from us we
did not go to fall for the we're not
going to say we're at the center anymore
we're not going to fall for that again
after capern Aus we're going to say why
would we be in the one special Galaxy
for which all the others are fleeing no
no if it looks that way to us it must
look that way to everyone you live on
any Galaxy it's you've got to think that
you're the center and you've got to see
it all of them expanding away from you
then you get a
homogeneous expansion like uh Pennies on
an expanding balloon each penny sees all
the others moving away from it and it
thinks it's at the center and then you
get the the homogeneous models of
general relativity Big Bang models and
Gau and his students Herman and alfha
then calculated that would be hot in the
early universe and that we could see the
microwave background radiation left over
from that today all of that based on
this assumption that you're not special
and you get all of that and then this
prediction uh was that there'd be
microwave background radiation left over
from The Big Bang of five degrees and I
worked with pensis and Wilson in
graduate school did a project with them
I you I observed on the pr for that for
measurement they discovered the
microwave background 2.7 de this is like
predicting that a flying saucer 50 feet
across is going to land on the White
House lawn and one 27 feet across
actually shows up this is the most
extraordinary prediction in in astronomy
and it shows how powerful the capern
principle is can I slip in a quick story
there sure I was on the NSF panel to
advise the president on should get the
presidential medal of science oh yeah
this is under Bush and George gamma came
up as someone who could earn this and
I'm there on a panel with biologists and
geologist they don't know this
prediction they don't and so I strongly
made the case for George gamma's
prediction given how fundamental it was
to all of cosmology and I think he was
still alive but not doing well and I'm
proud of my s for succeeding at this and
he was awarded the presidential medal of
science wow uh and okay I think his his
relatives came to to pick it up and part
inspired by our conversation just about
how how much of a brilliant
extrapolation of very basic information
about our universe that that was right
yeah he invited me to dinner once um my
mother knew a friend of hers that knew
his wife and when I was in Colorado
working one summer I got to go over as a
student as a student yeah he he picked
me up in his Rolls-Royce what you know
and he loved rolls-royce's because um
once the axle broke and rollsroyce sent
out a team to fix it and he said um well
how much will that be and they said
Rolls-Royce axles do not
break no fee you know when I visited
Cornell I was picked up by Carl in his
Porsche he had a Porsche yeah of course
well they had that in common
okay that's my who picked me up in what
kind of car story you got an equally
good one okay so sorry I interrupted so
where were you so my paper 1993 which
people should remember you know here's
its answer to the firmy question it's
real simple just to be clear you're
purely invoking the cernic principle to
arrive at this conclusion yes not
fundamentally differently from the way
GMA yes the cernic principle layered
onto the data available to him at the
time okay and hyans and H yes right so
here's the answer from the capern
principle and it's very simple a
significant fraction of all the
Extraterrestrial and intelligent
observers must still be sitting on their
home planet or else you'd be
special if there's a giant Galactic
Empire out there that we don't know
about they've conquered the whole galaxy
and they're just hiding you know they
don't want the likes of us to know we're
in a little experiment for them you know
that would make it special because if
you're an intelligent Observer you
should be one of the people in the big
the the big one okay in fact you can say
if you're a person on the world today
you should likely be born in one of the
countries that's above the median half
the countries in the world had when I
looked at this a population less than 7
million you're born in America that's
one of the like three big countries you
don't have to be in the biggest country
I mentioned this to Stephen Hawking once
he said I should according to this
principle I should be from China I said
no that's a minority of the people on
the Earth you should be above the median
which is 97% of the people living on the
earth live in countries above the median
little bitty countries with small
populations you're not likely to be from
there you're likely be from a random
place and what did he then say he smiled
at me okay
that's the way Stephen Hawking was he
gave me his characteristic
smile one time I had dinner with him and
I asked him a question and it takes time
I mean plus he's eating but it has to
spit it out because his throat doesn't
work but he tastes the food and he's
typing out replies with his eyes right
on his on his device right and I said
how come Isaac
Newton didn't f figure out how to
stabilize the solar system and he needed
LL
to figure out pertubation Theory to show
that every time a planet goes around
it's not tugged out of its orbit by
Jupiter because Newton was upset about
he didn't know he didn't have an answer
in fact he credited God for coming in
and fixing things every now and then so
I pose that question to him and then 15
minutes later out comes the answer
it's you can't think of
everything I know that's crazy that was
a do drop of wisdom and then he went on
to say Einstein didn't think of black
holes right right right right can't
think of everything that's right people
got Nobel prizes off of black holes
right that he didn't predict off of his
own theory he predicted gravity WS D got
Nobel prizes too that's right crumbs off
his plate he didn't even get it for
General relaity
[Laughter]
okay so let me restate what I think I
understand is your point yes with the
cernic principle as published in 1993 in
nature right so powerful is this idea
that we're not special right in a
statistically large enough sample of
things that if all the
aliens were colonizing all the planets
we'd be one of those aliens colonizing
the planets you would be you should ask
yourself why am I not a space colonist
you and I are Continental
colonists Africa was a home Colony home
you the
colonist you a colonist you were born in
New York we didn't colonize don't bring
my skin color into this Colony no no no
no I'm talking about we're living in a
colony from Africa yes okay both born
and yeah and and mo the majority of the
people on Earth to today are I'll call
them colonists because they came from
majority people on Earth were not from
the home their lineage is not from that
location that's right they arrive there
ultimately that's right with Africa as
the point of origin that's right okay we
didn't colonize them we are colonists
living in the colonies established by
continent of Africa Africa that's our
home planet I okay now you so you you
analogize the galaxy to the surface of
the Earth
yes Africa is the home planet the home
planet and all these satellite places
humans are living yes would be all the
planets across the Galaxy yes the capern
principal says we are most likely living
in one of these places yes cuz so many
more people do because so you see
there's so many nonsp special places for
intelligent observers to be and only a
few special places by definition that
you're likely to be in one of the many
non-sp special places one than one of
the tiny number of special places it's
just that clear okay now uh for example
you're saying all the aliens out there
are just like us they don't have to be
just like us just in terms of
statistically just their home bodies on
their home planet if most of the
intelligent observers in the universe
are not living on their home planet we
are intelligent Observer then we should
not be living on our home planet that's
right there you go and the fact that
we're still on the Earth tells us
something for example what's the chance
that we will colonize the whole galaxy
there's a billion habitable planets out
there the capern principle says the odds
against us doing that in the future are
a billion to one against why because if
that's the truth if that's what happens
what's the chance that you are living on
the first planet out of a billion that
people live on a billion to one against
and let me make this a little give you
another example I know that there's 11
people born in Antarctica that's all are
you born in Antarctica no they're born
south of everyone else so you're not
likely to wake up and find out that
you're the most
southernmost persons ever born you're
not one of them there's only 11 of them
there's eight billion of people out
there you're not likely to be one of
them yes so this puts some constraints
on our future prospects now if you ask
me can we become a multi-planet species
like two planets like us and Mars well
if that happens you're on planet one
instead of Planet Two there's a 50%
chance we could do that let's do that
that might as much as improve our
long-term survival prospects of our
species by a factor or two because we'd
have two chances instead of one okay I
was never a fan of that as an argument I
think we should be a two- Planet species
just cuz it's fun not because for
survival
reasons well um I gave a talk on this
yeah Elon Musk was the other person giv
the talk yeah and I said my Spiel yeah
it's good for our survival we have some
lifeboats you know like a com basket you
store your books you don't store them
all in this all in the alexandrian
library going to burn down protect as
well as you the only copies we got of
Sophocles plays are the ones is stored
elsewhere life has used this to help
survive spread out multiply you know I
gave my talk and he gave his talk he
said well I like those survival
arguments right but I thought we could
just go for fun he said exactly that he
famously said I don't want to die on
Earth I want to die on Mars not on
impact he said that I missed the second
half of that it's important half okay
but after that he said I like that talk
you know you can hear him on tape saying
that I like that previous talk that was
my talk and since then he has definitely
used the survival argument in fact Carl
San wrote me once he said I think you've
come up with the best argument for going
to Mars even though I wrote a book on it
gave 10 different reasons this one seems
really good so so these space colonies
are a very good bargain because you can
send like eight people 30 30 people and
they can live there on an indigenous
material and chemicals that you have
there Mars as an atmosphere and so forth
it's a great bargain because they do all
the work and it's not that you're going
to send a billion people there no no
that's not happening but you can send a
small number of people there they can
grow doubling in population over the
years and and so it's a great bargain
and something we certainly should be
doing for our survival that's why I
disagree I disagree rather just stay on
Earth well what happens if we have a
really bad epidemic on Earth because I
it's no sorry it's not that I disagree
it's not I disagree I'm a practical guy
okay I I'm a dreamer
when circumstances justify it okay
otherwise I just tell it like it is okay
you want to pitch tent on Mars grow a
civilization there so humans are on two
planets so if something bad happens on
one planet we have survivors on the
other planet there we go all I'm saying
is everything bad we can think of that
could possibly put life at risk here yes
the effort to prevent that to me yes it
seems is
less than shipping a billion people to
Mars no no no you don't ship a billion
people you slim a small number you know
how many people call fine okay so you
put some fertile people on Mars a few
fertile people on Mars they start making
babies okay and leave them alone after
that okay after 100 years let's say
there's a colony of a th000 people let's
say wa 600 years wait a thousand years a
thousand years yeah all right how long
will it take for them to get billions
we'll have 10 billion necessarily need
billions all I'm saying is all I'm
saying is you have two planets now
something bad is going to happen on one
planet is the other planet just going to
say oh we planned against this you all
just die and we will carry forth the
genome that's not how this is going to
play out you're trying to protect the
species in case something bad happens on
one planet you should do everything to
do that if you have the power to live on
two planets yes you're not going to
allow the other planet to die you're
going to ship them over or fix the
problem in your in your Biol laboratory
or deflect the asteroid if you have the
power to if you have the power to ship
people to
Mars and terraform it you have the power
to deflect an asteroid that might put
life at risk on Earth and it seems to me
you have the power to reverse any
geoengineered problem that we created
for ourselves on Earth people worked
hard protecting that alexandrian library
in the Titanic they had a hard time
getting people to go off on those little
dangerous lifeboats out in the water it
was comfortable on the it's let's wait
on the Titanic they had a hard time
getting the people to go in the first
boats Mars is not as habitable as the
Earth but like life life's living
comfortably in the ocean okay out on the
land very dangerous for them for them if
life didn't go out there we wouldn't
wouldn't be here as land animals the
ocean is always going to be better i'
liked an analogy you gave that our space
suits are like eggs eggs the little it's
water in there it's like it's taking the
sea with them our blood is sort of salt
like salty water you know bringing the
nutrients to our cells you know so an
egg can't survive outside of its shell
yet the chicken the chicken you can't do
it right it won't come out until it can
that's a little space suit it's a little
space suit right so if I have on a space
suit that's my egg and I'll be in that
until I can live outside the space suit
the budget that we would spend on
sending people to Mars I mean you got
one entrepreneur that wants to do it at
Le I mean uh it's a small amount
relative to G&P and the thing that gets
us maybe something that takes us by
surprise that's the only argument I can
possibly Embrace is that there's some
unforeseen thing that could put life on
Earth at risk and you want to be on two
planets but everything we can foresee it
seems to me would be easier to solve
that than to ship people to Mars after
you've terraformed it people said oh
we're trashing Earth we need an earth
backup plan whatever it
takes to turn Mars into Earth has got to
be a greater effort than to turn Earth
back into Earth living on the land is
harder than living in the ocean the
species that go extinct are ones that
are like on one Island right we we got a
whole universe out there that we could
go that we standing on the shores of
this universe as you would say as you
have said and are we going go out there
the surface of the Earth is like the
shore theic yeah so so so I say probably
andrean she has it's a smart thing to do
to to go to Mars
and with something we could do in our
generation I'm just saying so rich over
the years you've shared with me Exotic
ideas about how the universe got here uh
but they're in the the trash bin of
failed that's true brilliant ideas that
have failed but I remember two of them
yes and one of them because it's still a
mystery where did all the antimatter go
right because in the early Universe if
you have a pocket of energy and it
spontaneously becomes matter with
through eal mc you get a pair of
particles a matter particle and an
antimatter particle and as the universe
cools this these pair produced particles
should permeate the universe or then
sort of come back together
annihilating the particles and we'd have
just a universe of photons right okay
but we don't we have matter right we
have all the photons we also have matter
that doesn't have anti-matter
counterparts right so some symmetry law
got broken in the early Universe a
cherished symmetry law right right that
for every matter particle you have an
antimatter particle and you told me of
an idea that there's some tunneling of
the antimatter into another Universe
what what was this uh well this was an
idea I had in 1974 it was an early
attempt to find out what might have
happened before the Big Bang okay
inflation does a better job of this that
that predates inflation just bar
predates inflation barely okay because
the inflation idea came out during the
era of very high inflation 1980s yeah
yeah yeah the 70s into the early 80s so
so so the the story here is that I had
done a paper on the gravitational field
of a tachon I found an exact solution
for the gravitational field of a tachon
this is a hypothetical particle that
would go faster than light only faster
faster than light has to be going fast
you can't slow it down to light speed
you know you see one traveling here it
could have infinite speed you know it's
its wh line could be simultaneous in
some reference frame okay and I found a
very interesting general relativity
solution for this and it was it had a um
chankov cone of radiation gravitational
radiation trailing behind it like a
sonic boom there was a cone of
gravitational radiation coming behind it
that's because it's moving faster than
the speed a gravitational wave would
move that's right so that it makes a
shock wave a shock wave right and this
is expanding behind it it's and but in
front of it there was a collapsing
gravitational wave of these are called
Advanced waves these are ones that go
backward in time photons go forward in
time that's an asymmetry in the universe
photons go forward in time only Shake an
electron here Photon goes to Alpha
centaura gets there four years later
doesn't come from alpha Centura four
years ago when you shake an electron
electromagnetic waves don't come in from
infinity and meet you there that would
be photons going back to the past this
tachon solution lives in a universe
that's time symmetric photons can go
either to the future or to the past it
goes along a straight World line because
uh it's not accelerated because the
energy coming in from the trinov cone in
the future is in the front is being made
up for by the cone going out the back if
you look at a cross-section of this it
looks like two blades of a pair of
scissors that are tipped at a small
angle and they're moving at speed of
light the intersection Point can go
faster than the speed of light like you
can close a pair of scissors the
intersection Point can move that doesn't
transmit any it's not an actual thing
moving it's not transmitting any energy
or information faster than the speed of
light so this was very interesting
because it had that property well just
so when you close a pair of scissors the
the point at the vertex of the closure
is moving faster than anything that's
part of the scissors that's right like
you tip them at right angles you move
one foot forward this way and one foot
forward this way with the other scissors
the intersection Point moves square of
two further down the line and and
nothing's really moving faster than the
speed of light so I had a model where
there was the Big Bang at the center and
the matter particles went into the
future light cone of that event and they
all went up up here to become us to
become an open Universe up here that
would expand forever the antimatter
particles went backward in time because
wheeler showed that you could a positron
was equal to an electron going backward
in time this was an idea he called
Fineman excitedly over the phone this is
John AR wheeler 2:30 stud Albert
Einstein and then fan was his student he
called him up he said I know why all
electrons have the same mass they're all
the same electron the world line just
zigzags up and down in time goes up as
electron back as a positron up as
electron back as a positron imagine you
have a tapestry that's woven with on
vertical lines with with one spool of
thread that thread goes up as an
electron comes back down as a positron
up as an electron back down as a
positron and and so seeing all these
electrons and positrons but they're
still the same world line that one
particle okay here if you look around
you see many many blue threads because
every electron has it identically the
same mass it's the same electron this is
what this mod the same electron this
what he was saying now now this doesn't
work because we got more matter
particles than positrons yes it has to
be an equal number for this to work if
it were that universe
we would
see positrons and electrons moving
forward in time yes a positron moving
forward in time is an electron going
backward time they're the same so
therefore it's the same electron yes but
we only see it at the intersection point
in the present our epic yes at our epic
so all the electrons are just passing
they're going through they're going
through our moving slice through time
right so it doesn't it's a wrong idea
because you got more electrons than
positrons also you can get a a a virtual
pair to form in the
vacuum and suddenly there's an electron
positron pair it Li for a little while
and then it annihilates again these and
and fman showed that these existed in
the vacuum and so forth and you had to
use them calculating you know the the
Magnetic Moment of certain things and so
forth and and so we know that uh there
it's not all one electron okay so I had
at the matter because we're seeing
electrons do other things is the point
yes and well here's an isolated pair
youve made out of nothing that's a
little Loop of string it's not connected
it's not connected to the other it's not
all part of one piece so that that that
has to come from the physics of the
electric field and so forth okay I mean
when I was at Caltech I audited Mr Fan's
course on qu electrodynamics I didn't do
the homework I just aut it set in the
back and and and when he got to this
point he said when I figured out that I
could use the electrons the positrons
the electrons going backwards in my fan
diagrams I nearly fell off my
chair so so this was a very important
part of fan diagrams um and so then the
tons would go the antimatter goes in the
past light cone of this event and then
the tends go out toward the present of
this event that big space between the
absolute future and the absolute past so
uh inflation does a much better job of
this frankly so was was that the most
brilliant idea you've had just happened
to be wrong it happened to be
wrong I guess how could it be if it's
wrong well I thought of bubble universes
this was in
1982 goth had this problem of of how
does inflation end uniformly he wanted
it like he wanted to boil water on a pot
and have it turn into steam have the
vacuum energy of the early inflating
Universe turn into particles he wanted
to do that all at once then the universe
would be uniform but unfortunately it
would form Bubbles and that's not
uniform and we don't see that so my
answer to this was we live in one of the
bubbles it's a bubble Universe it
expands it it turns into an open
Universe it's an and and from inside the
bubble you just see toward the past the
uniform vacuum and you don't see the
other bubbles yet and and so this is a
solution to his problem and Lindy came
up with the same idea a few months later
and uh and then there was albre and
steinhardt again in short order and so
the their thing they did particle
physics with it as well as general
relativity and that became what's known
as New inflation so that's a better idea
okay because it had some truth to it
that's always good yes and so the
but but let me tell you this the higs
ban has this Mexican hat potential
you've seen it's it starts off with a
large vacuum energy you're at the top
center of the Mexican hat you a marble
on top there you roll off and you land
somewhere in the bottom Rim brim of the
thing and that's where we are today not
very much vacuum energy and the Bon can
oscillate then and that oscillation that
gives you a a positive mass for the hi
boson okay because it's concave down
there but in the early Universe it's
convex and this means that M squar the
mass squared is a negative number that
means that it's an imaginary mass and
that means it's
tonic it's like a tachon in the early
universe so when the vacuum decays you
get something called a tachon
condensate and it's like you've created
tachon
it's turned into tonic higs bosons that
that are behave like tachon but instead
of having a wave function that's
sinusoidal they have a wave function
that is um uh
exponential and so they Decay very
quickly and they don't last very long
exponential decay exponential decay you
know so you some people say well it's
not really a free tachon you know but
whitten's written papers on tonic thing
and my student Matthew cedc has written
papers on tonic condensate in the early
universe so maybe tachon have a role in
the ear Universe still and I'll keep
them on my radar and recently my past or
my future radar Neil turac has proposed
that we have a boundary condition on the
early Universe it's like a mirror so you
look back into this mirror you see the
mirror image of us is is the antimatter
going the other way it's not really
there it's a mirror boundary condition
so he's coming
like that and and I did a thing with
leing Lee you've seen this there's a
little time loop at the beginning of the
universe like there's a tree and it has
a trunk and the branches are coming off
the trunk more and more inflating
universes this is lind's picture leion
le and I said what if one of the
branches simply curls back around and
grows up to be the trunk and you have a
little time microscopic time machine
there the virtual pairs like a little
time machine goes up as electron comes
back as a positron it makes a little lo
you talk about this in your book yeah
time travel in Einstein's Universe right
the only self-consistent solution if you
got a little time loop at the beginning
and we found a stable Quantum vacuum
state for this the only stable solution
is the only self-consistent solution I
should say is when the photons uh go
only toward the future it solves that
problem how the photons go only toward
the future which is what we observe and
the temperature in this Loop is zero you
can calculate the temperature in there
there no particles at all and and when
you come out you start seeing Hawking
radiation it heats up because you can't
see all the other branches and so uh the
universe starts off in a low entropy
State and goes to a higher entropy state
that could explain the entropy eror of
time it would be a great prediction for
our theory if no one had noticed it but
unfortunately they've noticed it so it's
only a post prediction
postdiction postdiction we would say yes
so so uh so it has a number of
interesting features and and there's
about six different ideas out there okay
and we're one of them but you know all
right this is what you do if you're a
theorist you the first to introduce me
to the concept of a gin
particle yes just just give me a fast
explanation for that because I this
fascinated me well there's a movie
called Somewhere in Time yes I know that
one Christopher ree is in there
Christopher
he goes to this place up in Michigan big
hotel I've been there and he fell in
love with this actress he saw a picture
in there I'll love this girl I got to
meet this girl he said well she's died
in 1908 you know un fortunately for you
so he goes to his old Professor who
talked about time trial his old physics
Professor yeah physics how do you do it
well long story short he's able to go
back in time meet her they fall in love
and so forth before all of this happens
what motivates him to to try to go back
is there's an old woman strangely that
comes up to him and she hands him a gold
watch and she says come back for me you
know and he doesn't know who this woman
is but I think it was a locket or some
kind not watch it's a watch it's a it's
a watch watch it's a it's a time travel
movie it's a watch and he goes looks up
this actress to see who she is oh my God
it's this actress he fell in love with
the picture he saw in the thing she's an
old woman she came in you know wants me
to come back for her and she had handed
him this the watch the watch okay he's
got the watch he takes the watch back
with him okay back in time he meets her
they fall in love etc etc they're
planning their future together and then
because he successfully goes back in
time on the advice of his physics
Professor yes that's right he's got the
watch with him she says oh that's an
interesting watch you've got he hands it
to her she's holding it and then he he
sees a penny that he's brought with him
that he shouldn't have from 1979 or
something this breaks the spell you know
and he just the time travel he just goes
away and he's back in the present he
forgot to swap out his currency to be
appropriate he wanted to he did had to
do everything authentic got the old kind
of fashioned clothes and everything but
they they forgot that there was some
coins in the coin pocket so that broke
the spell you know it's not really
physics here but but anyway I broke the
spell and then he's back back in the
president he can never get back but now
if you look at the watch she then has
this watch in her hand and she takes
that watch she gets old and she takes
the watch and she delivers it to him he
brings it back in time and gives it to
her and gives it to her so the watch had
no association with a watch Factory it's
a circular World Line This is called a
gin particle j i n j i n n n Jin it's
like a genie okay Jin and and it has a
circular World line it has no no one
created it no one destroyed it right it
lives in a Time Loop in a way the
virtual particle is like that because
the electron and positron pair is formed
and then disappears it's a little loop
it's just sitting there it's formed you
okay so once you explain this to me I
got to then realize that in Back to the
Future yes Marty is
playing a tune by Chuck Barry
Chuck Barry's cousin yes hired to
perform at this dance yes he's Marty
play right you are okay right here's
Marty play right the chuckberry song
that's right and gets on the phone calls
Chuck Barry and says hey Chuck this is
the sound you've been looking for check
it out and he holds it up yeah and there
it is the song the song itself is a
only the song itself that's a j I didn't
notice that didn't get that I didn't get
that so am I allowed to call a
nonmaterial object a gin a Jin thing
it's a song that was never written yes
and it was never created right it lives
in this Loop AB absolutely now the thing
my comment on that would be and in a
Time Loop in a time machine you can have
an electron that goes around in a
complete circle and just because it's
going toward the future all the time
it's curved space time it's like mellan
went West his crew went West all the
time and they got back in Europe because
it was a curved thing so this can occur
do you know the story about his his
scribe or whatever they call the people
who kept notes on the ship pigafetta was
his name oh no he was a he was an
interloper a wealthy Italian guy who
just bought a seat on the trip yeah and
he kept very good records of every day
yes okay which you can do as you know
when the Sun hits the it's a day has
gone by Right comes
around and he thinks it's Monday that's
right whatever but everyone else says
it's Sunday or whichever order this was
he's thinking that it the town's people
are playing a practical joke on him
right oh that's a good story yes so this
is the discovery of the need for an
International Date Line right and it
happened on mellon's Voyage right so you
can have a gen particle that's an
electron one electron you can have a gen
particle that's more complicated like
the watch and I would just say the watch
is more less probable to
find like you have a virtual particles
electron and positron you could have a
virtual you know Leonard nemoy and his
antimatter counterpart form and then
disappear again that's less probable to
happen than than the um than the single
electron so you you would agree with me
that this song that Mar was saying
that's a that's a g very good Insight s
okay that's because of you I wouldn't
have thought that I would have thought
to think that you thought of that right
so rich I've kept a list my whole life
of movies that portrayed genius behavior
in people I was always just intrigued by
them I thought it'd be fun to show your
kids right just that there things you
can value like being smart is one of
them in life right and one thing I
couldn't wrap my head around somehow
everyone believes that if you're really
really really smart you can move objects
with your mind like where does that come
what who who did who says that they're
not saying they can just solve problems
faster or better than you they can they
can they can come up with solutions that
others couldn't no they're mind is going
to make tops spin in the middle of a
table no I'm not accepting that because
get the smartest person you've ever
known met or heard of if there was any
chance being smart would have those
Powers there'd be suspicious things
happening in their
presence even in the mildest of Senses
but no that somehow screenwriters can't
resist storytellers cannot resist this
right this happened in the movie Lucy
Lucy yes she's Scarlet Johansson getting
smarter and smarter cuz she's taking
some drugs she's using more and more of
her mind she's she's so she's moving
using powers that her mind already has
were just never tapped by her people are
coming for her with guns she just
levitates them to the ceiling knocks the
guns down and and she's walking down the
street she changes the color of her hair
I love this
movie but you know my my wife's named
Lucy she's very smart but I haven't
caught her levitating things around the
house yet I mean
it's not something if you come you're
floating on the ceiling the iPhone is
not just 10 times better than the cray
from computer from 1970 it's 100,000
times basically more memory 100,000
times as faster and it's not levitating
anything you know so I I I agree with
you and there's another movie that
actually preceded Lucy it came out in
2011 I think it was called Limitless
okay Bradley Cooper one of his early oh
yeah and he he took a pill he took a
pill and that was felt a little more
real because he could figure things out
the stock market you know it showed a
actual mental acuity going up not power
over matter right so right um and there
are others this is irrational I think
it's irrational fascination with
childhood genius will we ever get over
this I mean come on now really really
okay so your seven-year-old is doing
calculus so everyone has to like crowd
around the seven-year-old and presume
that they will one day become an adult
that'll get five Nobel prizes but that
never happens okay well sometimes it
happens let me say it doesn't happen as
often as people expected or want it to
happen given the level of resources
directed to such people yes that's okay
did Natalie Portman who you was judge of
her science fair project did she become
a scientist no she found something she
like better this is my point and she not
wasting her time doing that this is my
point she found we see what a kid does
really well and and all the adults crowd
around and we force them into these
things but let him be a kid you know the
psychologist want to get a hold of your
kid and someone else says let him be a
kid otherwise they they won't get
socialized they won't you know there's a
movie gifted like that gifted yes girl
manate is sort of that theme you know
yeah that Jody F they're real stars
these movies give the kid a love and a
good support and let them do what
they're interested in but meanwhile you
have the authorities who want
to sweep the kid away and again on the
assumption that kids like that become
adults like that when gal was six the
teacher he' done something naughty and
she made him add up all the numbers from
one to 100 and he said this the
brilliant gaus yes and he thought about
it he said well I could pair the one
with the 100 that's 101 he pairs the two
with the 99 that's 101 and they're 50
pairs like this and he got the answer
which is 5,50 you know and he just says
5,50 you know but there's a method to it
you see but he was six so so you know
and moart you know there's some people
that are like this but but a lot of
people flower later they show up later
so all different things can happen right
so the teacher gave Gus that task just
to punish him to punish him it was like
to shut up and go to the corner and
figure this out came back right with the
answer right didn't even in the time it
took him to walk to the corner he had
the answer fman said once if he lived
back in the day of quantum mechanics he
might have done better like Heisenberg
you know I mean he you know like he
would had more opportunities back there
to discover even more important laws of
physics depend on where you live say
this yes so he thought he'd born in the
wrong time when he introduced Heisenberg
who showed up at caly he said you know
if I'd been back there I might have done
something even bigger he might have been
somebody might have been more might have
been more that's right then they have
the like the autism movies where they
have the what they used to call Savant
yeah yeah the Savant Rainman you got you
got there people can remember what
happened to them on every day of their
life people pull out what day of the
week a date that you give them no matter
where they is pull it out of their head
I'm intrigued by all of these movies
another one had John Travolta in it
phenomenon I enjoyed that one he was hit
by
lightning and because you need some
reason for your brain to be different
right right he h by lighting and then
he's like really smart right and but
they couldn't resist and he's levitating
things as well couldn't resist that
that's okay as a kid I remembered
reading flowers for alron oh yeah only
later to learn it became a movie yes
called Charlie yes and I think that had
Cliff Robertson in it right so in this
as a kid I think he was mentally very
delayed and there was an experimental
drug that they would give to him and
they decided to test it on him because
it had worked on mice a Mouse a mouse
aldron alron right right and they gave
the drug to aldron and it did the maze
much faster and better and and
remembered it and everything and so they
gave it to to him and I remembered this
cuz I was old enough to feel this right
because all of his friends made fun of
him because he was just he was not smart
like anybody else okay he would do dumb
things or stupid things and they're just
mean people bullies and things they
would make fun into adulthood right
absolutely okay he had a a janitor job
and they made fun of him they put D in
his he a good-hearted person yes yes
he's
just see these mean people and then they
started doing the drug on him and he got
smarter and smarter and he started
outsmarting the people who were mean to
him and then they rejected him because
he was no longer someone they could poke
fun at and then we learned how the story
ends right drug wears off well the mouse
dies oh well worse yeah
okay but but anyhow I I don't know I
just the remarkable thing to me about
that movie and Cliff Robert won the
Oscar for yes he did was when he was
smart I don't know what they did or what
he did as an actor but his eyes sort of
twinkled I mean he his eyes looked alive
in a way that was abnormal he managed to
encapsulate the look of someone who was
incredibly smart I I don't know how he
did this but um I saw it there and and
his per performance playing the smart
person was very extraordinary I thought
because he he he he looked at and there
was no levitating in that movie he just
could solve complicated problems he was
trying to find the cure for his disease
as I I just don't think just because you
if you have a smart kid other people
shouldn't come in and tell your kid what
they should do with their smarts I I
don't I I have a I have a visceral
objection to it true of course I don't
mind a system that wants to find the
smart people in the group no problems
with that at all however one defines
being smart but if you now put people in
a category and Define that category in
such a way that no one else can
participate even if they try hard and
succeed then there's something wrong
with that to me I I it doesn't sit well
within me when I was a kid I was
identified by the US Department of
Education Office of the gifted and
talented and by being so recognized I
had access to certain opportunities and
I thought to myself they call it
gifted and talented gifted what is a
gift somebody hands you something did
you earn it did you work for it no a
gift and I wanted that branch of the US
government to be renamed Office of the
people who work hard
Office of the people who are devoted to
succeeding that way if you're not
branded as gifted you can say well let
me just try harder I'll try harder next
I'll study harder and yes some people
will learn faster than others for
whatever you know biochemical
neurological reasons but so what I'll
work harder than you do maybe to even be
equal to you but if I keep at it maybe
I'll be better than you and the system
had no way to find that uhhuh so and can
I give an example sure so in high school
we all took the SATs right I think they
existed in your day you're not that old
yes okay so I took the SATs my verbal
score was like okay it was it wasn't bad
but it was nowhere near any level where
a teacher would say watch him he'll go
far teachers pass judgment on you based
on your performance on exams that either
they administer or the state or the
federal government give you okay no
teacher would have said that at all
after my third
book and I had a column for a major
magazine I get a letter in the mail from
the educational testing service and
Richard where are they based Princeton
Princeton University that's right you
live in Princeton don't you okay so the
educational testing service purveyors of
the SAT yes just to show you what kind
of a grip they have on us all I got to
the letter I
said did they resend my scores did they
you know this like after my PhD okay and
it says Dr Neil degrass Tyson said oh
okay they must know at least that I have
a PhD earned long after their exam that
I took so I open up the letter and it
says Dear Dr Tyson we recently read one
of your essays we want to excerpt
sections of it to include in the reading
comprehension section of the verbal sat
will you grant permission right this was
a victory there's what I wanted to say
and there's what I did say you know what
I wanted to say I want to say you
okay first I don't get your high score
no teachers pointing to me will have any
literary ability in the future now you
want to use my writing as an Exemplar to
test people on your exam something's
wrong here uh okay that was on the
inside on the outside I said yes I gave
permission but I was very
disturbed by the fact that things can
unfold that way well they were by the
way that was even before yeah my
bestselling book okay which was on the
bestseller list for 81 weeks okay none
of them none of them would have and me
it's not like I was a Late Bloomer I
knew what I wanted to do with life early
just like you did okay right I I was in
the science fair and I owned a telescope
and I was in the astronomy club and I
was in the physics Club it's not like I
later on figured out how to put myself
together so that's why these people who
are identified early by some system of
measurement as being deserving of who
should be coddled and supported and
funded going forward omits whoever else
is Left Behind got to give them credit
they were smart enough to ask you to
write the
essay let me let me give you example
yeah Bob Vander and I wrote a book Bob
Vander we he's a CO our co-author on on
the 3D book the 3D version of our
textbook yes yes he's an engineer
photographer
extraordinaire he worked on this 3D book
with us and um 3D objects in the
universe yeah yes I would like people to
start playing 3 chest you know that's
above my head on a 4x4x4
grid yeah the 8 by8 serves me fine well
it's the same
number four by times 4 by4 okay play I
just speak up for 3D chess okay so I
didn't know 3D chess has only 4x4s well
it was proposed in 1851 on an 8 by 8 by8
board then it was popular in 1907 on a
5x 5x5 board I think they should use a
4x4x4 board because it has the same
number of places for the pieces to sit
you you know how it works The Rook can't
just go north south and east west it can
also go up and down you know so anyway
we worked on this 3D book together and
Bob and I had written this book sizing
up the universe wonderful book and we
asked ways to compare different relative
sizes of things in the universe brilant
and Weise we ask you to write a blurb
for us for the of the book did I write a
blur you did I was it good well here it
was you said A Feast for the eyes a
banquet for the mind and I said how did
he come up with that that's
terrific that's amazing that's an
amazing sentence know a banquet for the
mind weren you you know this is terrific
well thank you thank you a terrific
sentence yeah no English teacher would
have said any of that well there you go
we appreciated your expertise in in
language well I love words words are fun
the right word in the right time in the
right place there is no substitute and
if Shakespeare couldn't find that he
invented the word why not that's right
in my latest book I invented seven words
really yeah not not to show off or
anything there was a sentence where I
needed a word that didn't exist and so I
created it there you go I have one word
in the Oxford what is that you don't
know this no I never I you got one in I
got one in not on purpose it just is
yeah you need a word and you have the
word and now it's it's the word for when
the sun sets on the Manhattan grid oh
Manhattan henge that's right that's
terrific people now congregate there yes
and they no they block traffic for
reasons other than ConEd digging holes
in the street and or police activity
they're stopping traffic for the
universe right that's great I had
ambition to just learn and enjoy the
universe my whole life as did you yes
and I just didn't I didn't want people
telling me what I could or couldn't
accomplish I found that to be so
counterproductive we should have ways of
measuring people's ambition because
ultimately I think that's where you win
in your life's
trajectory from childhood into whatever
is the professional status you seek
uhhuh okay all right so rich we're about
to rank films that feature genius okay
we're gonna rank them now the categories
are s for Superior and then a b c d e f
and all you have to do is these are
grads plus A+ I guess the S would be an
A+ let's call it an A+ yes and since f
is below an e f is really bad because
who knows what an e is right okay okay
the E is not excellent e is below D
where would you rate the movie Charlie
Cliff Robertson in a role oh that's an a
because of his special performance when
he was smart I thought he was very
effective when he was smart as as an
actor he had a whole different facial
look to his eyes it twinkled somehow I
don't know how he did that okay okay
that was good I'd give
Charlie a b okay not because I didn't
enjoy the movie or think it was
important or have it have meaning to me
at the time I just thought it didn't
fully explore what genius could be okay
it was a very narrow storyline in the
context of Genius Revenge of the
Nerds I'd give that a c c i don't know I
mean I vaguely remember that movie but I
don't they got even with everybody yeah
they got even with everybody using their
Brilliance I guess so I just I I don't
remember much about it so okay all right
I saw it but I don't remember okay I'm
going to give it an A okay because they
outsmarted other people
because okay it came at the exact moment
where people learned that maybe being a
nerd is cool okay before then no one
nerbs got wedgied by the football
quarterback okay and what happened in
1984 the Apple Macintosh gets released
all of a sudden Computing comes into
your home into your classroom and the
the jocks and all the beautiful
people they want to do well on their
homework or they need to be friends with
the Nerds okay okay so I view that as
transitional okay okay I was invited to
give the commencement speech in the year
2000 for the Bronx High School of
Science yeah and I titled it Revenge of
the
Nerds because all of a sudden the
richest people in the world were the
Nerds not the oil tycoons or steel
tycoons it was the Geeks Who would have
been rejected from all the party
invitations so I viewed it as an
important movie in our culture okay then
even if as a movie it might have only
been a c all righty then okay but I got
to give it an A okay social Cal import
cultural importance okay let's keep
going Real Genius if you didn't see that
I'll just R it I don't remember okay s
oh my gosh I didn't say s i mean think
of Revenge of the Nerds but a better
film it had Valk Kilmer in it and it's
just some really smart kids just out of
high school into Pacific Tech okay what
was that yeah which school was that at
the Pacific Tech Real Genius was a
celebration yes of just being smarter
than everybody else okay look at how
many movies are celebrations of people
who are more athletic than everybody
else right who are prettier or handsomer
than everybody else this was a movie
people are smarter than everybody else
there you go and I found one error in it
there are others but this one was okay
okay there's a vending machine and his
friend comes in and sees him with this
lab cutter and he's cutting this
cylinder that's the cylinder is smoking
and he says what are you doing and he
says oh I'm cutting nitrogen so
solidified nitrogen okay like what is he
doing and then he gets a little circular
disc out of it and he puts it in the
vending machine he gets the candy out I
that's good
that's good and the mistake they made
was they said what are you doing he said
oh it's liquid nitrogen which of course
it isn't it's solid oh I see okay so
they messed that one up but just so so
finally being smart could be fun okay
fun and irreverent rather than weird and
and whatever else you might do with it
how about you see Goodwill Hunting yes
yeah what do you think of that with Matt
Damon as a janitor turn Math Genius uh
that's an a with some reservations why
uh well I like the it's a deeper movie
you know I this is and the psychiatrist
um you know Robin Williams won the osar
for that and he was very good and they
explained his genius work in Psychiatry
you know and and so the the the quibble
I had was that that the field medalist
in the thing he said I am nothing this
is sarsgard you know he said I am
nothing this guy's a I mean compared to
this guy I'm just Matt Dam I'm nothing
Sor the actor sgard who's the professor
who had been a field Medal winner which
you only win if you're younger than 30
so he's later in his career yes this is
the highest achievement in mathematics
yes I know Fields medalist and I think
they think their work is important but
they're thrilled when they see somebody
even better it doesn't diminish what
they've done but for example Roger
Penrose came to Princeton one time he
gave a talk he said let me tell you what
Stephen is thinking this is Stephen
Hawking okay I mean he's not going to
give his own talk he's going to tell you
what Stephen is thinking they they can
they can be good they can feel great
about the stuff they've accomplished but
recognize somebody of even greater
accomplish they can be happy with that
they didn't interview enough field
medalists to know how he would have
behaved in that situation I thought so
so that's you're going to drop it a
score for that reason uh well I said an
a with reservations okay all right a I'd
give it an A M because if the story was
more interesting and richer and it's a
it's a Towny you know if you're a Towny
yes no one gives you any respect if
you're live in the town of a very highly
respected University in that case it was
Harvard right right and you had the
snoody Harvard students so I thought it
captured that very well having seen that
and and and live that okay let's keep
going
uh Lucy with Scarlett Johansson how
would you rate that love that movie but
it's
crazy as you say you don't levitate
things if you're you know smart but I I
I love that movie she needed to get an
operation she went into the operating
room she looked at the X-ray on the wall
killed the patient on the operating
table he's going to die anyway you need
to operate on me she held him at
gunpoint while they operated on her I
mean she did feel the pain you know I
mean it was it was fabulous movie I'd
give that an a would you give it an S A+
well it went a little too far I'd give
just a okay yeah all right uh let's
break format here just for this one
exception Queen's Gambit was a TV
miniseries on netlix I would actually
give that an excellent or Superior you
know as would I because they went to the
trouble to get gr world champions and
things to produce the chess moves for
the movie they were real chess moves
real chess moves how did you know this
well they told you you know later you
know behind the scenes they bragged
about doing this but you know that was
very authentic because they're all just
actors and they just do what the script
tell she practiced moving the chest
pieces like she observed the way
profession they move them fast and kind
of you know they have a certain St
there's a certain wrist action and a
certain nonchalant about moving them if
you've played a lot she studied that and
she is uh Ana Taylor Joy right yeah that
was terrific so I agree this would be an
S right at the top Superior top of the
and it was localized to being a chess
genius but it still explored what that
meant around people who don't understand
you right and what your abilities are
right and you got a little bit inside
her head where you saw her play chess on
the ceiling I I like to see a movie that
tries to explain to you how they got
this idea inside the head and they
rarely do that no they don't uh how
about phenomenon John Travolta he gets
hit by lightning and he gets really
smart I'd say that's maybe a b c b b I
enjoyed it while I watched it but it
didn't keep calling to me right so I'm
going to give that one a b because it
was I like John Travolta in that role it
just didn't stick with me that much okay
all right gotcha there's some biopics
here yes okay so these are like real
people
right uh what do you think of the man
who knew Infinity math genius I give
that the top Mark that's
an yes it's s for super super super yeah
yeah I mean uh de Patel and Jeremy Irons
Jeremy Irons I love it anything by the
way we interviewed Jeremy Irons after
that movie came out I know you did yeah
it's he's in our archives archives yeah
I mean I heard all these stories from uh
littlewood who was played by Toby Jones
in the movie it's a true story it shows
you also how hard ranagen worked she was
an Indian mathematician who was
discovered only when he wrote a letter
to the University of Cambridge to Hardy
the mathematician yes can I come and
work with you can I come work and they
did and they did a great thing on
partitions which is the ways of summing
up to a given number for very high
numbers and they made a big contribution
to that field and I might mention I mean
the amazing thing about ranagen was they
came up with these incredible formulas
you know your man Newton he came up man
with an infinite series that gave it
equal to to Pi okay and the first term
in his series uh the the biggest number
that appeared in the formula he's got a
lot of N factorials and things like that
but the big the biggest number that
appeared in the formula was six okay and
the first estimate from the just the
first term was pi equal 3 and then you
add the second term it gets more
accurate and each one it's converges
quite rapidly it beat all the old you
talk about Newton's formula Newton's
formula beat all the old polygon
formulas it was a new infinite series
new method use calculus so ranagen has
his formula and he just presents it you
know and it's an infinite series like
Newton's and it's but it's got these big
numbers in it like 26,000
390 there's an
1103 there's a
[Music]
981 there's a 396 what are these what do
these numbers have to do with
pi what is this formula and and the
first term the first term in his formula
is accurate to buy to one part in 13
million and then it gets better after
that and people were just astounded but
these things that he came up with but
you want to rate it high because he's
smart or did the movie do a good job
conveying I think the movie did a good
job of conveying that well let me hold
your feet to the burner here because
you've got a beautiful mind I give that
a super also you get it see uh cuz that
was and it also explained a bit how he
thought of the idea yes you get I like
that that's and who's we're talking
about Nash is Russell Crow playing John
Nash my office at Princeton when I
postto there when we first met yes uh
John Nash would walk by every day right
I just see him walk by kind of standing
up into the sky I went to see them them
film the movie oh yeah okay and
everybody was excited everyone want see
Russell Crow or you know um everybody
was excited when the filming was there
and as I'm driving in I see Mr Nash
walking you know out of the physics
building you know I I just see him on my
way in and when I got I talking to some
of the people at the concessions I
saidou know I saw the
real everybody's here to see Russell
Crow the real meanwhile the real n John
Nash is
walking about a block away from me it
was a bit surreal okay so let's let's
order these then let's take back your
grade for the the man who knew Infinity
okay let's just take it back for a
moment okay we have the man of new
Infinity RI we have have IQ also filmed
at Princeton yes which portrayed
Einstein right uh Walter mathau was in
that me Ryan we have the imitation game
yes with cumber playing Allen Turing
alen yeah sure and of course the theory
of everything with Stephen Hawking all
of these are epic movies true stories
mostly true stories with lead actors
like Marquee actors players in these
roles just rank them for me well let's
see oh let me throw let me add another
one let's not be so science oriented uh
amadas I think I might even put Amadeus
first I agree s Amadeus next yes among
those now I I should comment that red
M's performance of stepen Hawking
captured his personality it was great
okay I mean they could have done more of
explaining how Hawkin got these ideas a
little deeper they didn't but uh I I
think his personality and he did a
terrific job and he won the Oscar okay
so let's put that at an A okay cuz
you're ranking these okay next one up I
guess I'd put Beautiful Mind ahead of
imitation game so so would I I think
because they explained how he thought of
it you that made you feel for the
character more because you got inside
his head right okay then imitation game
okay yeah do you know where imitation
game comes from that name no they didn't
say it in the movie they didn't yeah his
original paper oh on is this about anage
artificial intelligence yes oh his
original paper on the Turing test Turing
test yeah sure he didn't call it the
Turing test he called it the imitation
game right where you interact with a
computer sure and the computer pretends
it's a human and makes you think it's
human and if it can make you think it's
human that was counted as official AI
tyon did for computer stuff what gerle
did for mathematical show there was
computer programs that you you couldn't
call an algorithm that would say when
something would end because You' get
into these logical self-contradictions
did you did you know girle was at
Princeton I saw girle you saw him I saw
him we had the same doctor actually but
I at one point but I I he was at the
institute for advanced studies I saw him
walking yeah okay I that's gerle I'm was
impressed okay uh did relativity the
first time machine in general relativity
did that wasn't even his main field okay
he did the rotating Universe you could
do time travel to the past it was the
first solution 1948 that showed that
general relativity could have time
travel Solutions and then he kicked math
in his ass after that well you think he
did that before Oh he' already he'd
already done math I so where would you
put IQ I guess I'd sort of give it a b i
i I thought it was nice that you you
know you can find somebody really smart
in the gas station that is possible you
know but um I thought it was Charming
yeah but Charming is not enough to get
why I'm giving it a b no see I'd give it
a c really okay well relative to these
other biopics yes okay well I I gave it
a B I may be easier greater than you
okay oh how about Searching for Bobby
Fisher maybe that's even even the super
category uh it's it's U for this one
great line Ben Kingsley in it right Ben
Kingsley is playing the chess coach Guru
and I think your son studied with the
actual guy my son who got good at chess
when he he had already studied with him
when he right beat you beat he played
you in chess yeah okay so so he beat you
pretty quickly
thanks I have a photo of you just
holding your head like looking at
the okay so so there's this one line in
the movie that was just magical he he's
trying to convince the father that he
should let his son be under the tutelage
of him because he Ben Kingsley wanted to
see the next Bobby Fisher cuz he loved
chess so much he wanted to see what
magical Creations just like you're
looking for a work of art he wanted to
see what the next Bobby Fisher would be
like and he goes to the Manhattan chess
club and this is the best chess club in
the country and he he says now these are
over there is the American champion over
there is the Chinese grandmas or
something and over there is this
Grandmaster or something he says you
won't find Bobby Fisher here he's asleep
at your home in the
bedroom oh and the father says I'll sign
him
up I'll sign him up a CH based on a true
story it's a true story and the
interesting thing about that actual kid
was that he got bored with chess after a
while he did not become the world
champion but then he became a world
champion in taiichi this martial arts
did not know that which shows that he
had a talent for devoting yourself to
something and getting to be the champion
and there's a bunch of movies with that
have kid Geniuses right there's Matilda
that was fun and entertaining there's
Baby Geniuses that was a little weird
that was kind of a fun premise that baby
talk can be decoded into actually fully
intelligent conversations having with
each other I thought that was an
interesting premise but these are more
sort of cartoony story lines than
anything else right but anyway I think
we ranked enough of them there none were
a d or an f d or F no I think people
that take that project on as a challenge
yes are probably going to try to do a
good job do a good job with the right
budget and right Stars right stars all
right Jay Richard got the third thank
you
Neil you're great for coming by one of
my great friends in the world thanks for
coming by thank you
[Music]